[Music]
yoga for peace
nadi
the word nadi sudhi literally means
cleansing the nadis
when we say nadis we are not talking
about the 72
000 because these 72 000 are only a
branch out
of the two basic nadis the pingala and
the eda
36 000 branching out from pingala
36 000 branching out from eda this is
the
energy physiology of a human being
when we say nadi shuddhi we are talking
about
cleansing fundamentally the pingala and
eda
so that energy system will work in
balance
there is a connection between your
breath
and your mental structure to bring
balance to your thought is a
very important step that you need to
take
if you want to bring balance to your
activity your emotion
and the results of your life and the
impact that you have in other people's
lives
naughty should be plays an important
role
here are a few guidelines that will set
optimal conditions
and greatly enhance your receptivity of
the practices
please ensure cell phones are either in
silent mode
or switched off it is advisable not to
sit for the program
with a full stomach or immediately after
a meal
please sit with your spine comfortably
erect
hands uncrossed and palms open
these conditions will prepare you to be
in a heightened state of receptivity
and derive the most benefits on the
practices
these practices are very safe and simple
and can be done by anybody
the practices we will be learning here
can be done by
anyone ages 7 years and above
if you wear glasses while doing the yoga
practices
please remove them and keep them aside
how to do nadi shuddhi she will
demonstrate
please observe sit in a cross-legged
posture
with your spine comfortably erect eyes
closed
left hand should be loosely placed in
the middle of your lap
palm facing upwards use only your right
hand
use your thumb and ring finger fold your
middle
and index fingers the ring and little
finger are held straight
and side by side touching now block your
right nostril with your thumb
and inhale through your left nostril
after the inhalation is complete exhale
through the seam
in a similar fashion using the ring
finger
block your left nostril and inhale
through the right nostril
then exhale through the same
again block the right and open the left
inhale and exhale
continue like this be focused on your
breath
so when you do this nadi shuddhi what is
most important is
to breathe fully in and fully out
as slowly and as gently as it is
possible for you
you should not make any sound when you
exhale or inhale
so for this to happen you just need to
remember
one basic point so that nadi should be
happens by itself
you will always switch after every
exhalation
so that means whichever nostril you
inhale through
the same nostril you exhale through
you do narishuddi for a minimum of four
minutes
a few corrections for the practice do
not keep
your left hand on the thigh the left
hand
should be loosely placed in the middle
of your lap
to clarify on the right hand you use
only your thumb
and ring finger the ring and little
finger
are held straight and are side by side
touching
fold your middle and index fingers
if you are unable to hold them straight
do it as best you can
also there's a tendency to keep the head
down
or turn to one side
unconsciously your face may tilt one way
or the other
your head should be straight
if you maintain this your system will
come to a balance
very quickly
ensure not to press too hard on the
lower part of the nostril
locate the septal bone on your right
nostril
just a millimeter beneath that if you
place the thumb
with very minimal pressure you can block
the nostril
effectively so that no air can escape
ensure you are not breathing shallow
doing normal breathing
or holding the breath the breathing
should be
fully in and fully out
we will do nadi shuddi together now
sit in a cross-legged posture with your
spine comfortably erect
if you are unable to sit on the floor
you can sit in a chair with your legs
crossed
at the ankles
left hand should be loosely placed in
the middle of your lap
palm facing upward
use only your right hand use your thumb
and ring finger fold your middle and
index fingers
the ring and little finger are held
straight and are side by side touching
close your eyes now block your right
nostril with your thumb
and inhale through your left nostril
after the inhalation is complete exhale
through the seam
now using the ring finger block your
left nostril
and inhale through the right nostril
then exhale through the same
again block the right and open the left
inhale
and exhale continue to do this
until we ask you to stop
be focused on your breath
the breathing is fully in and fully out
do it as slowly and gently as you can
make sure your spine is comfortably
erect
ensure your head is straight
continue to be focused on your breath
you can end with an exhalation through
your left nostril and stop
please slowly open your eyes
peace is not the ultimate goal of life
it is the most fundamental requirement
if you hold it as the ultimate goal in
your life
you will only rest in peace
you